1.1.1 The Praise of God 


1. A, as its first of letters, every speech maintains; 
The “Primal Deity” is first through all the world’s domains. 


As the letter A is the first of all letters, so the eternal God is first in 
the world. 


2. No fruit have men of all their studied lore, 
Save they the ‘Purely Wise One’s’ feet adore. 


What Profit have those derived from learning, who worship not the 
good feet of Him who is possessed of pure knowledge ? 


3. His feet, ‘Who o’er the full-blown flower hath past,’ who gain 
In bliss long time shall dwell above this earthly plain. 


They who are united to the glorious feet of Him who passes swiftly 
over the flower of the mind, shall flourish long above all worlds. 


4. His foot, ‘Whom want affects not, irks not grief,’ who gain 
Shall not, through every time, of any woes complain. 


To those who meditate the feet of Him who is void of desire or 
aversion, evil shall never come. 


5. The men, who on the ‘King’s’ true praised delight to dwell, 
Affects not them the fruit of deeds done ill or well. 


The two-fold deeds that spring from darkness shall not adhere to 
those who delight in the true praise of God. 


6. Long live they blest, who ‘ve stood in path from falsehood freed; 
His, ‘Who quenched lusts that from the sense-gates five proceed’. 


Those shall long proposer who abide in the faultless way of Him 
who has destroyed the five desires of the senses. 


7. Unless His foot, ‘to Whom none can compare,’ men gain, 
“Tis hard for mind to find relief from anxious pain. 


Anxiety of mind cannot be removed, except from those who are 
united to the feet of Him who is incomparable. 


8. Unless His feet ‘the Sea of Good, the Fair and Bountiful,’ men gain, 
“Tis hard the further bank of being’s changeful sea to attain. 


None can swim the sea of vice, but those who are united to the feet 
of that gracious Being who is a sea of virtue. 


9. Before His foot, ‘the Eight-fold Excellence,’ with unbent head, 
Who stands, like palsied sense, is to all living functions dead. 


The head that worships not the feet of Him who is possessed of eight 
attributes, is as useless as a sense without the power of sensation. 


10. They swim the sea of births, the ‘Monarch’s’ foot who gain; 
None others reach the shore of being’s mighty main. 


None can swim the great sea of births but those who are united to 
the feet of God. 


1.1.2 The Excellence of Rain 


11. The world its course maintains through life that rain unfailing gives; 
Thus rain is known the true ambrosial food of all that lives. 


By the continuance of rain the world is preserved in existence; it is 
therefore worthy to be called ambrosia. 


12. The rain makes pleasant food for eaters rise; 
As food itself, thirst-quenching draught supplies. 


Rain produces good food, and is itself food. 


13. If clouds, that promised rain, deceive, and in the sky remain, 
Famine, sore torment, stalks o’er earth’s vast ocean-girdled plain. 


If the cloud, withholding rain, deceive (our hopes) hunger will long 
distress the sea-girt spacious world. 


14. If clouds their wealth of waters fail on earth to pour, 
The ploughers plough with oxen’s sturdy team no more. 


If the abundance of wealth imparting rain diminish, the labour of 
the plough must cease. 


15. ‘Tis rain works all: it ruin spreads, then timely aid supplies; 
As, in the happy days before, it bids the ruined rise. 


Rain by its absence ruins men; and by its existence restores them to 
fortune. 


16. If from the clouds no drops of rain are shed. ‘Tis rare to see green 
herb lift up its head. 


If no drop falls from the clouds, not even the green blade of grass 
will be seen. 


17. If clouds restrain their gifts and grant no rain, 
The treasures fail in ocean’s wide domain. 


Even the wealth of the wide sea will be diminished, if the cloud that 
has drawn (its waters) up gives them not back again (in rain). 


18. If heaven grow dry, with feast and offering never more, 
Will men on earth the heavenly ones adore. 


If the heaven dry up, neither yearly festivals, nor daily worship will 
be offered in this world, to the celestials. 


19. If heaven its watery treasures ceases to dispense, 
Through the wide world cease gifts, and deeds of ‘penitence’. 


If rain fall not, penance and alms-deeds will not dwell within this 
spacious world. 


20. When water fails, functions of nature cease, you say; 
Thus when rain fails, no men can walk in ‘duty’s ordered way’. 


If it be said that the duties of life cannot be discharged by any 
person without water, so without rain there cannot be the flowing of 
water. 


1.1.3 The Greatness of Ascetics 


21. The settled rule of every code requires, as highest good, 
Their greatness who, renouncing all, true to their rule have stood. 


The end and aim of all treatise is to extol beyond all other 
excellence, the greatness of those who, while abiding in the rule of 
conduct peculiar to their state, have abandoned all desire. 


22. As counting those that from the earth have passed away, 
‘Tis vain attempt the might of holy men to say. 


To describe the measure of the greatness of those who have forsaken 
the two-fold desires, is like counting the dead. 


23. Their greatness earth transcends, who, way of both worlds weighed, 
In this world take their stand, in virtue’s robe arrayed. 


The greatness of those who have discovered the properties of both 
states of being, and renounced the world, shines forth on earth 
(beyond all others). 


24. He, who with firmness, curb the five restrains, 
Is seed for soil of yonder happy plains. 


He who guides his five senses by the hook of wisdom will be a seed 
in the world of heaven. 


25. Their might who have destroyed ‘the five’, shall soothly tell 
Indra, the lord of those in heaven’s wide realms that dwell. 


Indra, the king of the inhabitants of the spacious heaven, is himself, 
a sufficient proof of the strength of him who has subdued his five 
senses. 


26. Things hard in the doing will great men do; 
Things hard in the doing the mean eschew. 


The great will do those things which is difficult to be done; but the 
mean cannot do them. 


27. Taste, light, touch, sound, and smell: who knows the way 
Of all the five,- the world submissive owns his sway. 


The world is within the knowledge of him who knows the properties 
of taste, sight, touch, hearing and smell. 


28. The might of men whose word is never vain, 
The ‘secret word’ shall to the earth proclaim. 


The hidden words of the men whose words are full of effect, will 
shew their greatness to the world. 


29. The wrath ‘tis hard e’en for an instant to endure, 
Of those who virtue’s hill have scaled, and stand secure. 


The anger of those who have ascended the mountain of goodness, 
though it continue but for a moment, cannot be resisted. 


30. Towards all that breathe, with seemly graciousness adorned they live; 
And thus to virtue’s sons the name of ‘Anthanar’ men give. 


The virtuous are truly called Anthanar; because in their conduct 
towards all creatures they are clothed in kindness. 
